Bible prophecy is a fascinating subject.
Prophecy is far more than just predictions about the future.
Jehovah knows all the facts.
He can even control and change factors to ensure the outcome he desires.
At Isaiah 55-11 he says,
My word that goes out of my mouth will not return to me without results
and it will have sure success.
Jehovah's prophecies have a perfect record of success.
He has led his people in the past.
So when he prophesies that he'll lead his people to real lasting peace in the future,
this is in a prediction.
It's a guarantee.
The prophecies given to Daniel clearly show that God's kingdom will without a doubt
bring lasting peace for all mankind.
I found a man from the axiles of Judah who could make no interpretation to the king.
I know who he is.
Can you really make known to me the dream that I saw at his interpretation?
This is your dream.
Jehovah is the great time keeper.
The prophetic portions of the book of Daniel built faith by showing that Jehovah knows the course of history
in centuries even millenniums in advance.
While portions of these prophecies were fulfilled in Daniel's time,
many of the details are being fulfilled right down to our day.
So as we discover the significance of these prophecies, we're excited about what lies ahead.
And our confidence grows as we discern how Jehovah has been leading his people all along.
In the days of those kings,
the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed.
The divine dream that Daniel interprets for King Nebuchadnezzar constitutes a prophecy crucial for the lasting peace of mankind.
A promise from Jehovah to set up a kingdom that would be vastly superior to earthly kingdoms.
History has shown us how every type of human government imaginable has failed.
So how would Jehovah's government come?
When would it arrive?
These were questions Daniel himself likely had.
Jehovah is a revealer of secrets.
He would eventually answer these questions in due time.
As a diligent student of the Scriptures, the prophet Daniel had full faith and confidence in Jehovah's ability to schedule events and bring them about.
And now likely in his 90s.
Daniel was particularly interested in prophecies regarding the restoration of his beloved city, Jerusalem.
Seven years at Babylon are fulfilled.
I will turn my attention to you.
And I will make good my promise by bringing you back to this place.
Jeremiah's prophecy had given Daniel hope because it indicated that Jews would soon return to their homeland of Judah and rebuild Jerusalem along with its temple.
In a big sense that Daniel would be interested in the restoration of the temple.
Because from the time of King Solomon, the temple in Jerusalem was the world center for worship of Jehovah.
So it was very important to the Jews.
In the Scriptures, the temple was often called the House of Jehovah.
Now after Jehovah allowed young Daniel on the rest of the Israelites to be taken captive to Babylon.
The city of Jerusalem and the temple were destroyed.
So naturally, a God-fearing man like Daniel would be interested in seeing the temple rebuilt.
Again, as a man of faith, Daniel supplicates Jehovah.
Oh, Jehovah.
He's due here.
I do forgive.
Oh, Jehovah, do be attention and act.
Do not delay for your own sake.
Oh, my God.
Oh, Daniel, give you insight and understanding.
The visit of this angel gave Daniel some answers and a hope.
Jehovah's messenger provided so many details of promises to come.
Jehovah assured Daniel that the Jews would be restored to their homeland.
Their exile in Babylonia was almost over.
But that wasn't the end of the angel's message.
He gave Daniel insight into something of far greater significance.
Daniel was told when God's people could expect the arrival of the foretold Messiah.
The Messiah would be the ruler who would make it possible for obedient humans to regain the blessing of perfect life.
Free from sickness, free from death.
The Messiah would pave the way for lasting peace for mankind.
What a strengthening message for Daniel to receive.
And he likely had some questions.
The angel told Daniel that Jerusalem and its temple would be rebuilt before the Messiah arrived.
But at the time, Jerusalem and the temple were in shambles.
How would they rebuild it?
And who would be responsible for this?
Babylon had been overtaken by meadow Persia, pictured by the silver chest and arms of Nebuchadnezzar's dream image.
Not long after this change in world rulership, Persian king Cyrus issued a royal decree.
It was a commission from Cyrus himself for the Jews to return to Jerusalem and rebuild the temple.
King Cyrus, releasing the Jews, was in notable contrast with the Babylonians' desire to keep them captive.
Cyrus even authorized funds from the king's house to cover construction expenses.
Why would this pagan ruler have any interest in first of all, letting the captive Jews free?
And secondly, financing the rebuilding of their temple in Jerusalem.
Ezra's words at Second Chronicles 36.22 tell us,
Jehovah stirred the spirit of King Cyrus of Persia.
Jehovah can maneuver events to make sure his word is fulfilled.
He can use anyone to accomplish his purpose.
And this would include even a foreign king like Cyrus, so with this decree, the Jews returned to Judah.
Launching a construction project and resettling an entire city was a major undertaking.
High priest Jeshua and governors Rubble were appointed to take the lead in setting up the altar and rebuilding the temple.
But this wasn't without his challenges.
Enemies of Judah sought to sabotage the building of the temple, attempting to disrupt the peace.
Initial attempts to halt the building progress fail.
However, eventually these enemies succeeded in having an official ban placed on the temple building work.
What was the problem here?
It appears the Jews let fear of man stop the building work after about 14 years of constant opposition.
Now there's a bigger picture of play here.
Remember Daniel's prophecy foretold that Jerusalem and its temple would be rebuilt before the Messiah arrived.
Yet with the work halted, the temple remained unfinished.
What would that mean for the coming of the Messiah?
Jeshua and Zerobelville needed guidance.
This is where Jehovah steps in to provide encouragement, first through the Prophet Haggai.
Haggai's clear and powerful message gets right to the heart of the matter.
He conveys Jehovah's direction to get up and keep building the temple despite opposition.
The Jews had a decision to make here.
Would they allow opposition to hinder the work?
Or would they listen to Jehovah's words through Haggai and keep rebuilding the temple?
To guide them further, Jehovah spoke to the Prophet Zechariah and gave him visions to provide the Jews with a message.
Zechariah made it clear to the Jews that Jehovah would not allow their opposers to harm them or thwart the temple rebuilding work.
It was only with Jehovah's guidance that the Jews would succeed.
Energized by Jehovah's motivating words through these two prophets, they courageously resumed construction of the temple and it was inaugurated in 515 BCE.
Now it seems that at some point over the following decades, the Jews lost their initial zeal.
The temple was rebuilt and inaugurated, but Jerusalem's walls and gates remained unfinished with huge gaps left in them.
And that was significant because the city was surrounded by enemy nations.
Without the protection of these walls, Jerusalem seemed vulnerable.
When Nehemiah learned of this, he was visibly distressed.
What's going on, Henei?
How are people?
Not good.
The conditions are disgraceful.
The walls of Jerusalem are broken down and its gates have been burned with fire.
What about the temple?
It stands, but the services are nothing but empty rituals.
Most of the people and the priests ignore God's law.
Nehemiah must have been shocked to hear about the condition of Jerusalem.
At this time, he was serving as cup bearer to the Persian king in Shushan.
The journey from Shushan to Jerusalem was about a thousand miles.
Still, Nehemiah felt compelled to act.
Nehemiah rejoiced at the prospect of rebuilding the walls.
The Jews at this time were still fearful of their opposers.
But Nehemiah was intent on changing that.
He knew that Jehovah was behind the work.
And if Jehovah is behind something, there's no amount of opposition that can thwart his will.
So the wall repairs began.
This isn't to say that there were not challenges along the way.
Opposers did not give up.
I recommend we turn the accusation of sedition against Nehemiah.
That's brilliant.
Yes.
It will beg for our help.
These opposers threatened the Jews,
schemed against them, and even accused Nehemiah of treason.
Nehemiah's peace and the peace of the Jews supporting the work was threatened.
But despite the attempts of opposers,
Nehemiah and the Jews looked to Jehovah for guidance and kept working.
When Jehovah declares his purpose,
there is nothing that can prevent him from carrying it out.
So if Jehovah wanted a rebuilt Jerusalem,
complete with rebuilt walls,
Nehemiah would have complete faith in Jehovah's ability to support the rebuilding efforts.
And with this support,
the city walls were completed in just 52 days.
Nehemiah, the wall is complete.
With rebuilt walls and a rebuilt temple,
physically the city was in good condition.
However, about 12 years later,
Nehemiah returned to Shushan.
During his prolonged absence,
the spiritual state of the Jews deteriorated.
It was so sad,
as many in Israel fell back into bad practices.
Some in the priesthood, including high priest Elishib,
no longer took their responsibilities seriously.
Therefore, Jehovah raised up the prophet Malachi
to counsel the negligent priests.
Why have you, Levites, despised Jehovah's name?
despised it. You present a blind,
lame or sick animal as a sacrifice,
and say that it is nothing bad?
Should Jehovah accept it from your hand?
And there's another thing you do,
so that he no longer looks favorably on anything you offer,
because you betray the wife of your youth.
Although she's your partner, your legal wife,
the lips of a priest should safeguard knowledge,
and people should seek the law from his mouth.
But you?
You have made many stumble.
Evidently, Malachi's words had little effect on the priesthood.
Despite his warnings,
the people refused to change.
When Nehemiah returned,
what he found shocked him.
For a long time, the priests
and the Levites have not taken their duties seriously.
When the people saw that, they stopped bringing in tithes.
Without the tithes,
most Levites and singers returned to their fields.
Did Elishib not tell the people to bring their provisions?
In your absence,
the prophet Malachi warned him and all the priests.
But Elishib,
he took our storeroom,
emptied it of our provisions,
he gave it to Baya to use as a dining hall.
In addition to no longer providing financial support,
the people started conducting business on the Sabbath.
What are you selling today?
Only the best quality fish from tired.
They were marrying foreign women.
I'm marrying Gisla today.
Gisla.
That mobile girl?
I heard you bind yourself with an oath and a curse not to take away from the nations.
This action could have disrupted the line to the Messiah,
and it definitely threatened to contaminate pure worship.
These men were bringing the restored nation into disfavor with Jehovah.
This is the same reason why Jehovah allowed Babylon to destroy Jerusalem in the first place.
So Nehemiah took action against these faithless ones.
Please cleanse this room and replace the utensils.
Yes, my Lord.
And gather all the Levites, the singers, the deputy rulers to me.
I'm assigning them all back to their posts.
He enforced the strict observance of the Sabbath.
What's the meaning of this?
I had to sleep on the ground last night.
You know God's law?
No work?
No business?
On the Sabbath?
Go!
You and all the Levites guard the gates and keep the Sabbath home.
Don't let anyone in.
He disciplined those who had taken foreign wives.
Did you not swear?
Never to marry someone who doesn't serve Jehovah?
Nehemiah, nobody cares.
Oh, did you not?
Yes, yes.
Why have you ignored the command of Jehovah and your own oath?
There's no doubt Jehovah's guide Nehemiah's efforts all along.
After a spiritual cleansing was done, a measure of peace was again enjoyed.
And with this vigorous rooting out of apostasy,
the record of the Hebrew scriptures comes to a close.
Now, we don't have an inspired record of events in the centuries leading up to Jesus' birth.
But history shows that Jerusalem underwent several changes during these years.
The Meadow Persian Empire was overtaken by Greece, represented by the copper belly and thighs of Nebuchadnezzus dream image.
While the city seemed to survive the change in control without any physical damage,
its spiritual state was threatened.
The Greek Empire set the stage for the spread of Greek language, culture, and religious thought.
And Israel was affected by this influence.
Years later, King Antiochus IV was determined to eradicate Jewish worship and customs.
He went so far as to sacrifice a peg to the Greek God Zeus at the Temple of Jehovah.
This was a vicious attempt to defile and stamp out pure worship.
However, the desecration had the opposite effect.
It sparked an uprising of zealous Jews, and three years later,
they cleansed the temple and rededicated it to Jehovah.
About a century later, Jerusalem experienced another change in rulership,
as Rome became the dominant world power.
Rome corresponded to the legs of iron and Nebuchadnezzus dream image.
Under the rule of Herod the Great, Jerusalem enjoyed considerable prosperity.
Herod's greatest work, however, was the reconstruction of the temple and its building complex.
The temple and its daily sacrifices remained in operation down to Jesus' day.
The Bible record picks up before Jesus was born.
What's happening? Is the Son of God already?
Are they angels?
Do not be afraid.
For look, I am declaring to you good news of a great joy that all the people will have.
For today, there was born to you in David City, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord.
Jesus' birth and ministry fulfilled many prophecies.
In 29 CE, Jehovah anointed Jesus with Holy Spirit.
This corresponds exactly to the words of Daniel's prophecy that Jehovah gave him more than 500 years earlier.
The promised Messiah had arrived.
Early in his ministry, Jesus read these words from the prophecy of Isaiah.
The scroll of Isaiah the prophet reads,
Jehovah's Spirit is upon me,
because he anointed me to declare good news to the poor.
He sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and a recovery of sight to the blind,
to send the crushed ones away free, to preach Jehovah's acceptable year.
Today, this scripture that you just heard is fulfilled.
Holy Spirit empowered Jesus to perform many miracles in just a few short years on earth.
This had a profound effect on the people living in his day.
A very sick woman suffered from a flow of blood for some 12 years.
He can heal me even if I could touch just the fringes of his outer garment.
I will get well.
I will touch my outer garments.
Who touched me?
Please forgive me, my Lord.
It was I who touched you.
A faith in you.
I knew that if I could just touch the fringes of your outer garment, I could get well.
Take courage, daughter.
Your faith has made you well.
The miracles Jesus performed more like anything that people had seen before.
Finally, the people had hope, a hope for the future, a hope for peace.
He even demonstrated that he had power far beyond any human ruler.
Lord Mary is here.
He isn't in here.
My brother would not have died.
Lazarus, come out.
Free him and let him go.
There's so much we can learn from Jesus' miracles, works and teachings.
They reveal Jehovah's purpose and power.
They show how enjoyable, how peaceful life will be under God's Messianic ruler.
Humans alive at this time could see visible proof of this.
Jesus' ministry accomplished so much in just three and a half years.
The prophecy regarding the Messiah continued to be fulfilled as His opposers succeeded in putting Him to death.
With the sacrifice of Jesus' perfect human life, the entire arrangement for worshipping Jehovah had changed.
There was no longer a need for animal sacrifices.
Pure worship was no longer centered around the temple in Jerusalem.
The only way to worship Jehovah acceptably was through the Messiah.
Now people everywhere could find the way to peace through faith in Jesus' ransom sacrifice.
The Jewish system of worship under the Mosaic law was over.
Jerusalem in the temple no longer had Jehovah's favor.
Jesus' perfect human sacrifice was the only solution for lasting peace.
So what did this mean for the city of Jerusalem and the temple?
Well, before His death, Jesus provided His followers with a warning regarding Jerusalem's destruction.
In Luke 21, 20 and 21, He says,
When you see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies, then know that the desolating of her has drawn near.
Let those in the midst of her leave and let those in the countryside not enter into her.
A good ruler guides His people.
Although it wasn't yet time for Him to take the throne as ruler of God's kingdom,
Jesus, by the way He acted, gave us insight into the kind of ruler He would be.
By providing first-century Christians with a warning to leave Jerusalem and all Judea,
He was guiding them and protecting them.
Jesus prophesied the destruction of the city and just a few decades later, that prophecy came true.
The Roman Empire still had control of Judea and tensions ran high between the Romans and the Jews.
Eventually, the Jews revolted against Roman rule.
With the city surrounded and Roman forces closing in, it seemed there was no way out.
But Jehovah's Word cannot go unfulfilled.
For no apparent reason, the Roman forces withdrew.
For faithful Christians, this was their opportunity.
It's simple.
Those who followed Jesus' direction to leave Judea were guided to safety.
For those who delayed, escape became difficult or impossible.
There was no doubt Jerusalem no longer enjoyed Jehovah's special favor and protection.
The city and its temple were completely destroyed.
There are parallels we can draw from the warning Jesus gave to those first-century Christians.
To the warning we have been given for our day, Jesus gave us one composite sign that indicates the destruction of this current system of things is very close.
Prophecies in the Bible give us no doubt we are living in the last days.
Jehovah has not revealed all the details of how everything will work out, but we know that everything he has revealed will come true.
This includes details outlining how world events would unfold in the time of the end before mankind would experience permanent peace.
Remember, Daniel's prophecy indicated that there would be only one dominant world power in place at the time of the end.
By World War I, the power represented by the feet of iron and clay had emerged.
During that war, Britain and America forged a partnership that continued through the Second World War.
This means a special relationship between the British Commonwealth and Empire and the United States of America.
Neither the sure prevention of war nor the continuous rise of world organizations will begin without what I have called the paternal association
of the English-speaking people.
These two countries continue to be a dual English-speaking world power.
The characteristics of iron and clay used to represent this world power are significant.
And as the toes of the feet were partly of iron and partly of clay, so the kingdom will be partly strong and partly fragile.
At times, the United States and Britain have displayed iron-like strength through their involvement in armed conflicts.
However, iron, mixed with clay, is considerably weakened.
This can be observed as common people undermine the Anglo-American world power's ability to act with iron-like strength.
As the political and social developments foretold in the Bible come to a climax, we have a measure of peace.
We know Jehovah will guide his people, even as the world's spiritual and moral conditions sinks to new depths.
As many in the first century Jerusalem continued their lives as if nothing had changed.
So too today, many continue on with their lives.
Meanwhile, we remain alert as we see fulfillment of Bible prophecy right before our eyes.
In the days of those kings, the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed.
The book of Revelation tells us what will soon happen.
The political rulers of the world will give the United Nations unprecedented power and authority.
The Apostle Paul foretold that the nations will declare peace and security.
But it won't prove to be true peace.
The nation supporting the UN will attack the institutions of false religion.
Then a coalition of Earth's governments that the prophet Ezekiel calls God of the land of May God will attack God's people.
Yet we don't need to be fearful.
That's when we can put into action all of the lessons we've learned.
Those who trust and obey Jehovah's guidance can look to the near future with confidence.
As we've seen, Jehovah has always been in control of the situation.
He has never guided his people in a certain direction, then failed to provide for them.
That's why we can say that the lessons we learn from the faithful men we've studied are more than just lessons.
This has been Jehovah paving the way for peace from the start.
Looking back, we see exactly how Jehovah has led his people.
It took many years, but he's been in control the whole time.
Would it make sense to think he isn't in control anymore?
No power in heaven or on earth can prevent Jehovah from accomplishing his express purpose.
He has never relinquished control, and he is still guiding his people.
Now think about this.
If Jehovah has guided his people to this point, we can have full confidence that trust and obedience to his direction will prove to be our salvation.
Even if a way out seems impossible.
Jehovah is all powerful.
He's going to help us through whatever we may face.
We won't have to fight, and we won't need to fear annihilation.
Jehovah has things under control.
We'll not be passed on to any other people.
It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms.
We'll stand forever.
God's kingdom will fill and renew the entire earth.
Jehovah's promises will become completely fulfilled.
Lasting peace will finally become a reality for all mankind.
Just imagine what faithful servants have to look forward to under Jesus' heavenly rule.
He will be able to provide what no man ever could.
Can you imagine what that will be like?
For look, I am creating new heavens and a new earth,
and the former things will not be called to mind.
Nor will they come up into the heart.
The righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever on it.
He will swallow up death forever, and the sovereign Lord Jehovah will wipe away the tears from all faces.
He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more.
Either one morning, nor outcry, nor pain be any more.
The former things have passed away.
At that time, the eyes of the blind will be open,
and the ears of the deaf will be unstopped.
At that time, the lame will leap like the deer,
and the tongue of the speechless will shout for joy,
or waters will burst forth in the wilderness, and streams in the desert plain.
They will build houses and live in them,
and they will plant vineyards and eat their fruities.
For the days of my people will be like the days of a tree,
and the work of their hands by chosen ones will enjoy to the full.
But the meek will possess the earth,
and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.